Good morning to the Excellencies, my respected teachers and my dear friends. I would like to speech over importance of education at this great occasion in front of you. Education is very important to all of us. Our parents make us learn many things at home and then send us to school after age of three years. Our home is first education institute where we learn how to behave to others and other skills however school education is very necessary to be successful in practical life.

Through school education we learn and develop personality, mental skills, moral and physical powers. Without proper education, one gets lack of all educational benefits in his/her life. Education is the only key to success in personal and professional life. Education provides us various types of knowledge and skills. It is a continuous, slow and secure process of learning which helps us in obtaining knowledge. It is a continuous process which starts when we take birth and ends when our life ends.

We should make our habits of learning always all through the life from our teachers, parents, family members, friends and other related people in our life. We learn to become a good person, learn to live in home, society, community and friend circle. Attending school and receiving education is extremely vital for every person and necessary for those who want to achieve success.

We all take birth in same manner at the same planet however do not get same opportunity to receive such type of formal education which may lead everyone of us towards success because of the lack of money and knowledge of parents. One who gets proper education becomes admired by the members of the family, community and country. Proper education by all brings equality among human beings and removes the feeling of difference.

Education not only makes us able to learn about history, science, math, geography, and other subjects however it makes us smart enough to learn how to live life and handle bad situations.

Thank You


Good morning to the Excellencies, my respected teachers and my dear friends. As we have gathered here to celebrate this special occasion, I would like to speech over the importance of education. Good and proper education plays a great role in shaping our future and professional career. It helps us to develop personality and earn recognition and respect in the family and society. We can say that education is socially and personally an essential part of the human life.

We cannot ignore the importance of education in our life at any cost. As we see daily in the society lots of social issues just because of the lack of proper education. Social issues like inequality, gender discrimination, religious differences and so many problems are there because of the lack of education in our life. Proper education helps us to maintain the personal and social standards in daily life.

In such a modern, technological and competitive world, there is still the issue of education among poor and uneducated people of the society which needs to be solved as soon as possible. Education is the key to solve all the social, personal and professional problems of the people. Proper and higher education makes us more civilized to live in the society. One cannot make his/her good image in the society and live prosperous and happy life without getting appropriate education. It makes us able to maintain the healthy surroundings.

Now-a-days, unlike ancient time, getting proper education has become easy and simple because of the online system and correspondence facility in all the big universities. It has made education system easy because of which poor people can also get education in their own field of choice. There are many huge efforts and plan strategies by the government to maintain the quality of education all over the India.

Education helps us to be healthy, save many lives, boosts economic growth, earn money, raise quality crop, promote peace in the society, eradicate poverty, remove gender discrimination and inequality, promote women and children rights, bring good governance, remove corruption, make aware about fundamental rights and so many. Good education does not mean to study hard and get good results however it is to conquer new things for the betterment of whole mankind.

Thank You

 
Good morning to the Excellencies, respected teachers and my dear friends. I would like to speech over the importance of education at this special occasion. The real meaning of education is much more than the success in personal and professional life. People in the modern society have narrowed the meaning of education. It does not aim that educated people gets professionally recognized instead it aims much more than this. It is not only to run in the race to go ahead and read only the school or college syllabus. The education really means to improve the physical, social and mental well-being, develop personality and improve skill level. The aim of education is very vast and makes a person, good person.

In providing good level of education, teachers play very important role. Whatever we learn through our parents and teachers goes with us throughout the life which we again pass on to our next generation. The aim and benefits of proper education is not restricted to only personal gains instead it benefits other people of the family, society and country. People in the society have different meaning, needs and perceptions about the education however the real meaning and importance of it never changes.

A good education helps us all to be independent in the society as well as get over of the problem of poverty. Many people do education passionately and not as a workload. They love to read and develop their mind and skill. Some historical people like Swami Vivekananda spent their whole life in getting education and sharing knowledge among poor people of the society.

We too should get proper education by understanding its real value and get benefited completely. Our aim of getting education should be to help other needy people of the society to get them over the weaknesses and superstitions. Education has unbelievable power which keeps us away from evil powers, helps us in making self dependent and provides us new possibilities and opportunities to become a problem solver and excellent decision maker.

It keeps our mind calm and peaceful by maintaining the balance among body, mind and soul. Through the key of education one can open his/her difficult lock of the success. Many people do hard work for whole day just to earn some money for getting two times of food in the absence of good education. So, education is must for everyone of us to have a better and happy lifestyle.

 
A very Good Morning to ladies and gentlemen present here. I am honored for being given the opportunity to speak on the topic – “Importance of Education”.

To begin with, ladies and gentlemen, the term “Education” needs no introduction. We all are well aware of what it means, since our childhood. In a lay man’s term education refers to an ability to read or write in mother tongue; though, in a broader perspective it implies having a specialized knowledge in a particular field. For ex- arts, science, engineering, medicine, accountancy etc.

The Latter skills are mostly acquired through formal education, which is classroom based and is provided by trained teachers. The basic education skills, on the other hand, not necessarily be acquired in class rooms, but could also be gained through, community classes or even at home.

Education plays a vital role in the life of everyone- from a daily wage labour to a top ranking CEO of any XYZ multinational company. Though the level of education acquired differs in both the cases, nevertheless, the importance of education is very well understood by both of them. One knows that s/he is destined to be a labour for life, because of the lack of education, while the other is thankful that s/he acquired the best formal education, which has helped him/her reach where s/he is.

However the advantage of basic education, even in the life of people engaged in unskilled menial jobs, can’t be denied. An ability to read, write and do simple calculations, make them independent, confident and less susceptible to fraud, irrespective of whether s/he is a daily wage labor or a rickshaw puller or a small farmer. Education liberates their thoughts and actions, making them capable of wisely using the resources available and progressing gradually.

Besides, all the technical aspects, education also transform the personality of an individual. It makes a person more polite and sensible. An educated person can interact better with others, or can even argue logically, when needed. S/he can analyze a person, place, thing or event in a better way and make appropriate judgments. Education changes a person’s perception of looking at others and the society, making him/her more rational or reasonable. S/he is more likely to be compassionate towards problems faced by the individuals and the society as well, and give opinions or suggestions.

Education not only benefits individuals but, also has the potential for transforming a nation by putting it on the path of progress and growth. Every citizen is a pillar of the nation and a nation rests on billions of such pillars. The more educated the pillars are, the more strong will be the nation’s foundation.

An educated person initiates a chain reaction- s/he makes sure that their children are educated as well, making way for an educated society, an educated society makes way for an educated nation an lastly an educated nation finally leads to an educated world. The educated workforce that a nation has contributes immensely in its own economy as well as to the economy of the world.

Education not only reforms the life of an individual and economy of a nation, but also transforms a society by diminishing centuries old social evils like dowry, child marriage, child labor, gender discrimination etc. These all are main hindrances to any nation’s prosperity and growth, and they all could be killed by only one weapon – education. An educated society is more like to break free from orthodox customs and traditions, and move forward towards a better tomorrow.

Education also is the most potent tool to eliminate two of the major challenges faced by any nation and even the world – poverty and unemployment. An educated person acquires necessary skills, which make him/her employable or gainfully engaged. She/he can be gainfully employed in government/private sector or could be self employed. In both the cases, s/he becomes financially independent and self sufficient to meet the demands of his/her family. Thus, education is a two pronged spear, killing both unemployment and poverty, in one shot.

Last but not the least, another beauty of education is that, it could be acquired at any age, irrespective of your caste, creed, gender or religion. All you need to have is a desire to get educated, somewhere deep inside your consciousness. The world has many examples, where people have acquired formal education even in later stages of their lives and enjoyed its rewards.

Before I end my speech, ladies and gentlemen; I would like to request you all, to make all the possible efforts to spread education, within your individual capacities. Volunteer to teach in your spare time, inspire and help the underprivileged in gaining education, volunteer with an NGO working for the cause of education etc. There are so many things; you could do to make the nation more and more educated, as much as your resources and time permit you.

With this I end my speech. Wishing everyone, all the very best in your individual careers, aspirations and personal life. Thank You!