I am delighted to be here and my particular thanks to you all for changing your programme for me. Coming to Gateshead today, I feel inspired and optimistic. Home of the Millennium bridge, the world's first tilting bridge, this is a community determined to move forward. The most recent government inspection found local services to be excellent and getting better. Over 80% of residents have said "yes" to the draft regeneration proposals for the area. Its children's services are among the best in the region. And with almost 60% of pupils getting five good GCSEs, that's above the national average and the highest figure in the north-east.

One year ago today, I stood before this conference to give my first keynote speech as secretary of state for education and skills. On that day, I said that "to continue to raise standards in our schools and develop well-rounded individuals who contribute to society and the wider economy, we must get our education system absolutely right - shaping it to the needs of children, responding to parents, combining radical reform with increased investment." One year on and I am even clearer in that view.

My belief and one that I think is shared with everyone who can see the potential of education to transform people's lives for the better, is that we have to offer the best opportunities and ensure the highest standards for all children, wherever they live, whatever their background. I believe that equity and excellence are not merely desirable - they are social and economic imperatives. That is what drives me in this job and I will not be diverted from what we have to do to achieve an education system that really does succeed for all our children and young people.

This belief in social mobility and social justice underpins everything that I have set out to achieve over the past 12 months. I have been and remain determined to create the conditions for success. And all of you here today, together with the people at the heart of our children's centres, our schools, our colleges, our universities have been and remain crucial to progress.

It is only through real social mobility that we can create a fair society and get ahead of the competition in the globalised economy. And as I said last year in that first speech, the risk of failure is just too great to countenance.

One year ago today, I said I was never going to tolerate a situation where so many young people, and especially those on free school meals, didn't get five good GCSEs. I was never going to tolerate the scandal of our low staying-on rate, one of the worst in the industrialised world. And I was never going to tolerate job prospects for school-leavers depending so heavily on their family background.

One key response I made to these challenges was the 14-19 white paper. It set out how we would address the historic weakness in vocational education in this country and offer new opportunities to young people to develop practical as well as academic skills.

There were those who were sceptical about my proposals and perhaps even doubted my commitment to them. I hope that my total determination to transform opportunities for all 14 to19-year-olds is now clear to all. Last month we published an implementation plan that sets out the detail of how we will realise our ambitions for young learners and increase the staying on rate to 90% by 2015. At its core is a new statutory entitlement for all young people to study one of our new diplomas - giving all young people a chance to learn in a way that motivates them and progress naturally on to the next level of learning.

But 2005 was not just about 14-19. We have also taken forward the roll-out of the Sure Start programme and a national network of children's centres. We have taken big strides to ensure extended schools will be used to integrate local services for the benefit of all children.

We have, with the help of Sir Andrew Foster, begun a thorough review of further education. Recently, I set out how I intend to close the funding gap between schools and colleges. We have pushed on with our skills policy and sought to reform university applications procedures to help widen access. The thread running through all of these policies being unashamedly to expand life chances for all.

I know it has been a busy year for schools and for the wider sector. I know that we expect a lot from you. 2005 saw many new arrivals in the world of education, all designed to raise standards and widen opportunities for everyone. We have introduced, for the first time ever, guaranteed planning, preparation and assessment time for teachers, the culmination of a series of reforms designed to give teachers more time to devote to raising standards. Schools have just finished the task of developing new staffing structures - ensuring the greatest rewards go to those teachers who make the most difference in the classroom, not the back office. And we have carried out major reforms of children's services: thanks to the hard work of local authorities there are already 125 directors of children's services in place to lead the way towards more integration and cohesiveness in this area.

These have been genuinely tough challenges and I know that last term was particularly difficult for many heads and teachers. But they are all essential reforms if we are to transform the life chances of every pupil in every school.

Thanks to the efforts of local authorities, teachers and support staff, we have seen progress in all four areas that I focused on in last year's speech: behaviour, teaching and learning, parental engagement and personalisation.

I know it would be easier if we said: "Enough! Let's stop here," but life doesn't work like that. There are no magic bullets, no simple solutions. And no one, not least in education, can afford to stand still.

As I said last summer in a speech to the Institute for Public Policy Research, the evidence indicates that, while we have come far, we still have a long way to go to deliver real social justice. Social mobility may even have fallen in some post-war decades. The results of our 11-year-olds suggest that there are still unfair attainment gaps between the best-off and the poorest children - while schools in the most deprived areas have made the most progress since 1997, the most deprived pupils in those schools still lag behind.

And, despite our efforts, there is still too much variation between schools. Over the last year I have seen countless examples of schools that were struggling and are now being transformed by new leadership and new ideas, so that, within a few years, they are not only out of special measures, but leading the system. I want every school to feel the benefits of such inspired leadership.

The challenges we face are not just in London or even urban problems. In the country as a whole, more than four out of 10 children do not get five good GCSEs and for poorer kids the figure is seven out of 10. These figures compel any government that cares about social justice to continue to explore how to raise standards further. The north-east, for example, has made significant progress, but there are still 40 schools where less than 25% of pupils achieve five or more good GCSEs; and there are still more than 1,000 pupils in this region who leave school with no qualifications at all.

And of course as a country we face an economic challenge. Our economic prosperity depends on staying ahead of the pack - China and India are gearing up their education systems for a genuine global economy in services as well as manufactured goods.

This is why we need to constantly raise the bar on what we expect. We have halved the number of failing schools, but there are too many that are coasting or underperforming. The new inspection framework, in operation since September, and the tough measures on underperformance set out in the schools white paper will give new impetus to the drive for school improvement. It may not be comfortable, but it is necessary.

Indeed, raising the bar may well mean that there are initially more schools going into special measures. And the publication of GCSE results including English and maths will highlight the number of children who, despite getting five good GCSEs, have not achieved the basic skills that are essential for further education and the workplace. Not comfortable, but necessary.

I'm not underestimating the progress that has been made - we should all celebrate it. I will have no truck with those who say standards have not really improved. Indeed I could reel off a number of statistics about progress, about the best ever results, about record school attendance figures, about schools in disadvantaged areas making the fastest progress.

We should celebrate these achievements - but we should celebrate them, and then keep moving on, moving forward. Standards are much better, but still not good enough.

The progress that we have made has been based on investment combined with reform. We have overseen significant increases in per-pupil funding and ensured that more of this goes to the frontline, with multiyear budgets to support effective planning and deployment of resources. We have also made an unprecedented investment in the fabric of our schools - Building Schools for the Future, the largest capital investment programme since the second world war, has the potential to transform the way we think about education.

In terms of reform, we have given schools more flexibility and autonomy - a reduction in bureaucracy; an overhaul of accountability; a "new relationship". The role of the local authority is moving from a provider to a strategic leader, with more schools able to take decisions about staffing, assets and admissions, within the law and the code of practice on fair admissions.

The job of the modern local authority is to secure the best services they can for pupils and parents. This is a significant challenge - local authorities need to think and behave differently; to learn new skills. At the forefront of this change is the Every Child Matters agenda, but we now also need a new approach to raise school standards. Many of you are already working in precisely this way.

Alongside the changing role of the local authority, we have seen increasing involvement in education for social entrepreneurs and for the voluntary and community sector. Specialist schools and academies have harnessed expertise and energy and turned it to the task of raising standards with considerable success.

Academies have improved at more than three times the national average; and specialist schools consistently outperform their non-specialist counterparts. And I've been struck by new research showing that specialist schools with the largest proportion of pupils on free school meals are improving at a much faster rate than other specialist schools. Never let it be said that our reforms don't work for schools facing the biggest challenges.

These reforms have established a clear direction of travel where we empower schools with greater freedoms at the same time as we ensure that local authorities are able to play a stronger strategic leadership role. My white paper takes this to the next phase, ensuring that the right powers are held in the right places by the right people - a new settlement for schools and local authorities. The reason I am keen to get this settlement right is that it sets the framework for a step change in standards allowing action in every school in every community, so that every child - particularly those from poorer backgrounds - gets the education that they deserve.

In the classroom, this means more personalisation. It means more catch-up and study support. It means expanding the Gifted and Talented programme. It means more opportunities for pupils to follow their interests - both as part of a more flexible curriculum and through the new opportunities afforded to them by extended schools and the youth green paper.

It means a more integrated approach to high-quality, and tailored children's services and affordable childcare that meets the needs of every child and every family.

Good schools and teachers know all about their students and their potential. They develop teaching and learning that builds on strengths and helps to improve weaknesses. And they encourage aspiration and create opportunity for all. And I will support them with new resources - £335m for secondary schools and £230m for primary schools earmarked in the dedicated schools grant for this purpose over the next two years. Every authority will receive an element of this funding, but it will be targeted particularly at authorities with the highest levels of deprivation and low prior attainment.

Personalisation must be underpinned by a new relationship with parents. We know that good parenting is essential to a child's success at school. Achieving that means better information about pupil progress and the opportunity to influence the education their child receives. It means real choice, both within and between institutions. And it means support and outreach so that all parents particularly those from more deprived backgrounds, can have the same opportunities to get involved, rather than at present, where it is easier for the middle classes to play the system.

New resources secured in the budget allow schools to take on new parent-school advisers to help engage all parents. Finally, I am clear that our parents' agenda also means that parents must take their responsibilities seriously - supporting teachers and ensuring that children turn up to school ready to learn.

And none of this is possible without good behaviour. Every child deserves to learn and every teacher deserves to work in a safe and positive classroom. We've made it clear that every school must have policies on behaviour that are agreed and respected by all and that are fairly and consistently enforced. And taking forward recommendations from a group of expert head teachers and senior teachers, we will be introducing a clear power for school staff to discipline pupils.

But we also know that what happens in the classroom depends, crucially, on school leadership and governance. Which is why the white paper allows schools easily to acquire a trust as a key new tool of school improvement - improvement in individual schools, in all the schools in a local community, and in all schools across the country.

Trusts will be an opportunity for schools and local authorities to boost aspiration, opportunity and achievement in their area.

Trust schools will take us to the next level: they will enable good schools to work with schools that need improving; they will enable more schools to benefit from the expertise and energy of local universities and local business foundations; and they will make it easier for all schools to bring in local community organisations and integrate local services.

They will build on what we have seen working in the system - schools reaching out not turning in; run for pupils not for profit; and as I said at this conference last year, part of a system where it is "parents choosing schools, not schools choosing parents".

Trust schools can - through the creation of a shared trust - collaborate more easily and effectively with other schools to spread improvement more widely and give all pupils in the community access to the best education. We must use the strengths that we have to lead system-wide progress.

Through a trust, a high-performing school could help turn around a failing school or challenge a coasting school to pick up steam again.

And in my experience, that's exactly what today's schools, with today's schools leaders and indeed today's parents want. As I see it, within the framework we are proposing, there is no contradiction between increased autonomy for schools to take their own management decisions and greater collaboration between schools. Strong and confident schools engage in collaboration because they see the benefits for their own pupils; they want to spread the benefits to the rest of their community; and they are eager to lead system-wide improvement. Trusts will provide a strong vehicle for such collaboration - a bridge to better standards for the schools that need our help, not a tunnel for schools that want to go it alone.

Within civil society, there are lots of groups who want to help improve our school system. Universities, for example, already play a tremendous role in supporting their local schools. And discussions are taking place on possible Trust models through which universities can be productively involved and have included the Universities of West England, Exeter and Portsmouth Universities.

There is also much untapped potential nestling in every community. It is seen in the strength of New Deal for Community projects, and in neighbourhood renewal projects up and down the country. And it is seen in individuals volunteering. For instance, since 2002 Community Service Volunteers has seen a 370% increase in the number of private sector volunteers it places in schools. Trusts will be a way of harnessing that potential for the good of pupils.

I am confident that trusts will help us move forward because they build on things that have made a difference to standards; external support and collaboration between willing partners - have enabled schools to lift their pupils' achievement and help schools in some of our most deprived areas to improve more quickly than average. Excellence in Cities, specialist schools, academies, and - through the Raising Achievement, Transforming Learning Programme - mentor schools and consultant heads working with partner schools to improve their performance. And let's not forget that many doubted that these reforms would work at the time.

Trust schools will also build on the strong governance arrangements that we have seen working in voluntary-aided schools, which already have a trust that appoints the majority of governors. Trust schools will build on the flexibilities that almost 900 foundation schools have used to manage their assets and resources.

So this is not about new structures, because we've seen that these arrangements work. What is exciting and innovative is the focus on people, because trusts are a way of bringing the experience, energy and enthusiasm of other professionals into schools and to establish a model for excellence that can then be spread more widely, quickly and easily.

I am delighted to launch today a prospectus for trust schools. It sets out the potential of what they could achieve for their pupils. It is an inspiring vision of trusts supporting rising standards across the country. Based on local need. At the core of local provision. Benefiting local people.

The possibilities are many, and importantly, it will be for local people to work together and decide what works best for them. We are looking for innovative ideas that will drive up standards. And local authorities, as the local strategic leaders, will be able to focus on setting up the sorts of trusts that provide the best local solution for their schools.

Of course there are concerns. So many people care so much about education, but that passion can sometimes turn into a fear of change. It is my responsibility to address those concerns and to make sure that people understand clearly what we are actually proposing.

So let me put to bed a few of the myths surrounding trust schools.

No school will be forced to acquire a trust - our approach to trusts will be a voluntary one. Schools should choose to work with a trust, although of course where a school is underperforming trusts should be one option for a local authority to consider. And where a school adopts a trust the local authority can refer the plans to the schools adjudicator if it feels that the trust would not be in the interests of local provision.

Trust schools will be part of the maintained sector and part of the local family of schools. This is a leap forward to greater collaboration and community involvement, not a jump back to grant-maintained schools.

Trust schools will operate under the same local fair funding system - funded by the local authority according to the local funding formula.

And crucially trust schools will work under exactly the same code of fair admissions as other schools do now. Life chances for children depend on the admissions arrangements of all schools in their area.

I genuinely hope that we can create a consensus on admissions. But we will have to see how broad consensus there really is on there being no return to selection. I can give you a categorical assurance that there will be no new selection by ability for Trust schools, or any other school, and no under the counter return to the 11-plus through the "choices" of individual heads. Indeed we outlawed new selection by academic ability in 1998 in primary legislation.

We have to learn from experience. On admissions the old way was to allow schools to select who and how they wanted. This worked well for a minority of children, but failed millions. The modern way is to get every school working with all its pupils using setting, tailoring, Gifted and Talented programmes and catch-up classes to ensure that every child gets the right education.

Finally, trust schools will remain a full part of capital spending planning. They will remain part of the Building Schools for the Future programme which focuses on the needs of schools and their pupils rather than on type of school. And trust schools will not be able to tear up a private finance initiative contract into which the local authority has entered. Trust schools will have more control over the management of their assets, but we will ensure that publicly provided or funded assets are protected properly for this and future generations.

The development of trust schools will enable local authorities to concentrate on their role as the guardian of standards and champion of pupils and parents to see that local provision is as good as it is possible to get. We are clear that the local authority will have all the powers it needs to raise standards and strategically plan.

But this must be in the context of its duty to parents and pupils. So if there is a school that can expand and wants to and parents want to do so, the local authority must have a good reason to argue against that. And if a large group of parents come forward with proposals for a new school to satisfy an unmet need then the local authority will be under a duty to seriously consider it. The schools commissioner will be there to help and to keep an eye on the way things pan out - not to compel anyone to do anything, but to make sure that all concerned and involved are putting the needs of their parents and pupils - and of their community - first.

Trust schools are a key part of my schools white paper. They bring the different streams of reform into a powerful current that will carry us towards our ambition of an education system where there are no barriers to success. I'm passionate about the proposals in the white paper because I believe that they are what we need, and most importantly, what pupils need.

Everything about this white paper is about improving standards. Look at all our key proposals. Turning around failing schools quicker - that's about improving standards. More one to one and small group tuition - that's about improving standards. More involvement of parents in their child's education - that's about improving standards. Making greater use of the energy and dynamism in our communities through trust schools - that's about improving standards.

This is a standards white paper. The values of my predecessors are not up for sale - they are priceless - and I will never give them up. And most of all, like all of you and all your colleagues already back for more in 2006, I will never give up doing what's best for the people who matter most - pupils and parents. That means:

· Integrating and securing the best services for children and families.
· Raising standards for every pupil in every school through more personalisation.
· Making sure that every young person has the opportunity to follow the courses most suitable for them as they prepare for life after school and the world of work.

Our challenge is to continue to work together to make that happen. My commitment to you is to continue to keep up the strategic direction of reform and to keep up the investment.

Schools and colleges should make the most of increased autonomy and flexibility to be the best that they can be and help others aspire to the same.

Local authorities must grow into their new role.

For the wider community, this is the opportunity for more of you to get involved.

And with that commitment we can move nearer our goal - an education system that gives to all, wherever they come from, the opportunities and support to achieve their potential, play their part in a good society and contribute to a prosperous economy.

Thank you.